# PipeWire support for Mixxx

* **Owners:**
  * `@pri-yan-shu`

* **Implementation Status:** `Not implemented`

> TL;DR: This proposes PipeWire audio API support to Mixxx, SoundDevice hotplug
  for PipeWire, ability to route audio from Mixxx UI, and react to external changes.

## Why

PipeWire is an audio API for Linux. It replaces the multiple audio APIs already
present on Linux, like ALSA, JACK, PulseAudio, and has compatibility layer for
all those APIs. It also supports connecting any audio source/sink (from any
application) to Mixxx, like the system audio inputs/outputs. This allows for
flexibility in routing, for example adding an effect before input/after output.

### Pitfalls of the current solution

Currently Mixxx supports all audio APIs through PortAudio, which abstracts over
audio APIs for multiple platforms. Features specific to a single API are not
exposed, which leads to poor experience on Linux (for example,
[incorrect naming of JACK ports](https://github.com/mixxxdj/mixxx/issues/5979)).

* There is no hotplug for SoundDevices
* As mentioned in the "Why" section, PortAudio only lets us route to and from
  soundcards, and not the input/output of any arbitrary program

## Goals

Goals and use cases for the solution as proposed in [How](#how):

* Refactor code related to current audio backends, and allow the selection of
  PipeWire among the available backends.
* Get feature parity with the current PortAudio backend. Ensure that drift and
  jitter correction is happening properly in case of multiple DAC's
* Provide accurate DAC sample playback timing info, which will be used for
  jitter free waveform rendering.
* Hotplug for audio devices on PipeWire
* Support external patchbays by synchronizing routing UI with changes through external patchbays

### Audience

This change affects linux users using PipeWire.

## Non-Goals

* To be decided

## How

* The proposal will be implemented as a PipeWire client which listens for all
  node/port/link objects (similar to existing PipeWire patchbays), and creates
  SoundDevices accordingly. Since this happens for all source/sink available, not
  just soundcard source/sink, we can route any source/sink to Mixxx. This will
  work with the current routing UI in Sound Hardware preference page. Same
  mechanism will be used to update the routing UI to reflect any changes made by
  an external patchbay.

* On Linux systems, PipeWire would show up in the Sound API option in the
  preference panel, among other audio APIs offered by PortAudio. The existing
  soundio code would be refactored into enumerators for different audio backends,
  similar to Controller enumerators.

## Action Plan

The tasks to do in order to migrate to the new idea.

* [ ] (week 1 25/5 to 31/5) Implement support for PipeWire backend.
  * [ ] Refactor SoundManager into individual Enumerators (PortAudioEnumerator, PipewireEnumerator, NetworkEnumerator).
  * [ ] Add PipewireEnumerator, SoundDevicePipewire, test working with program and soundcard input/outputs.
* [ ] (week 2 01/6 to 07/6) Add soundcard hotplug support.
* [ ] (week 3 08/6 to 14/6) Implement drift/jitter correction and sync with multiple soundcards
* [ ] (week 4 15/6 to 21/6) Test drift/jitter correction and sync with multiple soundcards
* [ ] (week 5 22/6 to 28/6) Modify PipeWire graph from Mixxx UI
* [ ] (week 6 29/6 to 05/7) Update Mixxx UI from external graph changes
* [ ] (week 7 06/7 to 12/7) Implement hardware soundcard volume access

